   #Block Club Chicago » Feed Block Club Chicago » Comments Feed Block
   Club Chicago » Psychiatric Hospital In Uptown Investigated Over Reports
   Alleging Abuse Of Children Comments Feed alternate alternate

   Skip to content
   Block Club Chicago
     * Neighborhoods
          + Austin, Garfield Park, North Lawndale
          + Beverly, Mt. Greenwood, Morgan Park
          + Bridgeport, Chinatown
          + Bronzeville, Near South Side
          + Downtown
          + Englewood, Chatham
          + Hyde Park, Woodlawn, South Shore
          + Jefferson Park, Portage Park
          + Lakeview, Boystown, Wrigleyville
          + Lincoln Park, Old Town
          + Lincoln Square, North Center, Irving Park
          + Logan Square, Humboldt Park, Avondale
          + Midway, West Lawn
          + Pilsen, Little Village, West Loop
          + Roseland, Pullman
          + South Chicago, East Side
          + Uptown, Edgewater, Rogers Park
          + Wicker Park, Bucktown, West Town
     * Send News Tips
     * Donate
     * Shop
     * My Account

   (Submit) Search
   Search ____________________ Search
   Subscribe
   (Submit) Newsroom Navigation
   Aurora Chicago Lakeshore Hospital in the city’s Uptown
   community.Vignesh Ramachandran/ProPublica Illinois

Psychiatric Hospital In Uptown Investigated Over Reports Alleging Abuse Of
Children

   "Most of the kids there are wards of the state. There is no one to
   rescue them."
   Published on Nov 1, 2018 1:20PM CST Uptown, Edgewater, Rogers Park
   Primary category in which blog post is published
   Duaa Eldeib, ProPublica @deldeib

   See more

Share this:

     * Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
     * Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
     * Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
     * Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)
     * Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)
     *

Credibility Indicators

   These are selected by the writer and confirmed by the editor
     * (Submit)
       Original Reporting
       – +
       This article contains new, firsthand information uncovered by its
       reporter(s). This includes directly interviewing sources and
       research / analysis of primary source documents.
     * (Submit)
       On the Ground
       – +
       Indicates that a Newsmaker/Newsmakers was/were physically present
       to report the article from some/all of the location(s) it concerns.
     * (Submit)
       Sources Cited
       – +
       As a news piece, this article cites verifiable, third-party sources
       which have all been thoroughly fact-checked and deemed credible by
       the Newsroom in accordance with the Civil Constitution.
       Learn more about Civil’s Credibility Indicators

   UPTOWN — A Chicago psychiatric hospital that treats hundreds of
   children in state care is under federal and state investigation over
   safety concerns and alleged sexual assaults, and it may be forced to
   close if it can’t correct deficiencies.

   The Illinois Department of Children and Family Services has
   investigated 16 allegations of abuse and neglect this year at the
   Aurora Chicago Lakeshore Hospital in the city’s Uptown community,
   including allegations that children were raped and sexually abused by
   staff and other patients, physically assaulted and inadequately
   supervised, a ProPublica Illinois investigation found.

   Among those reportedly abused or hurt in the incidents were children
   who were cleared for discharge from the hospital weeks or months
   earlier. DCFS, however, had failed to find them a place to go — a
   persistent issue for the troubled agency that ProPublica Illinois
   documented this year.

   In addition to child welfare investigations, the Illinois Department of
   Public Health has conducted a series of inspections on behalf of
   federal authorities since July that found the hospital had failed to
   ensure the safety of suicidal patients, obtain consent before giving
   patients — including children — powerful medications and sufficiently
   monitor patients.

   Federal authorities have said they will cut off funding that is crucial
   to the hospital’s operations by the end of November if officials there
   do not implement immediate changes, according to federal records and
   court documents.

   Hospital officials declined to answer specific questions from
   ProPublica Illinois, but the CEO, David Fletcher-Janzen, said in a
   statement that they have been working with state and federal
   authorities to fix deficiencies. He said the hospital strives to
   provide a safe, therapeutic environment for patients.

   “Chicago Lakeshore Hospital takes every allegation of impropriety very
   seriously and files reports immediately. All allegations, regardless of
   probability, are reported to maintain a high level of caution and
   transparency,” Fletcher-Janzen said. “Our goal is to improve the lives
   of these young patients so they can grow to be healthy adults both
   physically and mentally.”

   The hospital has come under fire before. State inspection reports in
   recent years found that an employee, who was later terminated,
   repeatedly punched a 26-year-old patient who had hit him; that the
   hospital failed to ensure a safe setting for a 15-year-old girl who
   received 18 stitches after cutting herself by breaking off part of a
   toilet; and that proper precautions were not taken with a patient with
   a history inappropriate sexual behavior, according to records obtained
   through a Freedom of Information Act request.

   In 2010, DCFS hired consultants from the University of Illinois at
   Chicago to conduct a review of Lakeshore and found a host of problems,
   from patients reporting sexual assaults by peers to “lax or
   inconsistent supervision by staff.” Lakeshore officials disputed the
   findings at the time, saying the report was “highly subjective” and
   contained findings “unsupported by the facts.”

   The Chicago Tribune revealed in 2010 that children at the hospital had
   been sexually assaulted.

   Neil Skene, the special assistant to DCFS Acting Director Beverly
   “B.J.” Walker, said the agency is focused on making sure children are
   properly cared for and addressing the issues federal officials have
   identified.

   “We are fulfilling our responsibility to oversee the care of youth who
   are our responsibility,” he said. “We believe that the current
   monitoring bodies will let us know if their concerns rise to a level
   where we need to stop using the hospital. “

   Many of the new allegations echo those of the past. In September, a
   7-year-old girl was taken to the emergency room at UIC after she
   reported that a 12-year-old boy pulled down her pants, sexually
   assaulted her with his finger and “made her bleed,” according to
   confidential reports obtained by ProPublica Illinois.

   While at the emergency room, she also reported that a Lakeshore
   employee had kissed her on the mouth and sexually assaulted her with
   his finger, and said she was “afraid to go back” to Lakeshore. A UIC
   social worker, records show, expressed concerns about delays in
   Lakeshore’s reporting and seeking medical care for the girl.

   That same Lakeshore employee was at the center of another investigation
   in August. A 12-year-old girl reported that the man had locked her
   door, grabbed her by the shirt and touched her breasts. When she tried
   to pull away, she said that he pulled her down onto his lap, squeezed
   her buttocks and made her sit on his lap and touch his penis.

   Both girls are in DCFS care. The agency said it continues to
   investigate the alleged assaults and the employee is not currently
   working at the hospital. Chicago police have also opened an
   investigation.

   DCFS found sufficient evidence to support four other complaints this
   year, including one report in June that an 11-year-old girl sexually
   acted out toward four girls on her unit, according to agency records.

   In yet another case, a 17-year-old boy diagnosed with bipolar disorder
   was left with a bloody mouth and bruising in April after he said two
   male employees dragged him to his room, where they pinned him down
   while holding his arms over the bedrail, according to DCFS records. The
   boy said one of the workers threatened to break his arm.

   He had been admitted to the hospital that day after a suicide attempt,
   his mother said.

   “It’s never easy sending your child to the hospital, but the thing that
   helps you sleep at night is at least you know they’re safe,” the mother
   said in an interview. “But he was far from safe. He was hurt and
   scared.”

   When she arrived at the hospital to visit her son, she said she was
   horrified at the sight of blood on his lips and mouth and bruises on
   his face and arm. She began looking for another hospital to transfer
   him to immediately.

   “I knew I could rescue him from there,” the mother said. “But most of
   the kids there are wards of the state. There is no one to rescue them.”

   Hospital officials did not respond to allegations about individual
   cases. Fletcher-Janzen said employees who are subjects of allegations
   are either suspended or moved to a different building while Lakeshore
   and DCFS investigate.

   The child welfare agency continues to send children to the hospital,
   which serves children and adults in two buildings a few blocks apart.
   Nearly half of the 16 investigations have not been substantiated, and
   the other cases reflect individual incidents rather than a systemic
   problem, Skene said.

   “The question for DCFS is whether children are safe there,” Skene said.
   “Nothing that we are seeing gives us concern for their safety.”

   As of late September, after officials with the Centers for Medicare and
   Medicaid Services notified the hospital it planned to stop making its
   Medicare payments, 18 children in DCFS care were patients there,
   including a 4-year-old boy who had been at the hospital for nearly
   three weeks, according to documents.

   At least three of those children had already been cleared for discharge
   but DCFS had not found them other placements, records show. ProPublica
   Illinois revealed in June that hundreds of children have spent weeks
   and even months trapped in psychiatric hospitals as the agency searched
   for residential treatment centers, foster homes and other placements.

   DCFS acknowledged the problem and said it was working to find more
   appropriate homes.

   The number of DCFS patients at Lakeshore remained at 18 earlier this
   month; some children, including the 4-year-old, had been released, but
   others were admitted as federal and state officials continued their
   inquiries.

   The investigations alarmed Meryl Paniak, DCFS’ acting inspector
   general, who in a confidential memo urged Walker to take action. Paniak
   wrote that she had “significant concerns for the care and safety of the
   children” at Lakeshore, according to a copy of the memo obtained by
   ProPublica Illinois.

   Paniak listed steps the agency could take, ranging from immediately
   planning for alternative placements for the children to sending an
   official to Lakeshore each day to evaluate the hospital’s progress
   resolving its problems.

   DCFS officials complied with nearly all of the recommendations,
   including the daily inspections and making plans to move children. But
   they have not agreed to one of Paniak’s most sweeping recommendations:
   bringing in an independent expert to do a comprehensive review of the
   treatment and mental health services at the hospital.

   In an interview, Paniak said an independent voice could provide
   expertise and objectivity. She said she was disappointed by the
   agency’s decision not to seek an independent review.

   “I don’t think that the department has done enough to ensure the safety
   of the kids there,” Paniak said.

   DCFS relies on Lakeshore to treat children in need of psychiatric
   hospitalization. Last year, of the approximately 1,100 children and
   adolescent patients treated at the hospital, 41 percent were in state
   care, according to court filings from the hospital. The majority of the
   hospital’s revenue comes from Medicaid payments.

   Lakeshore typically sees more children from DCFS than other area
   hospitals because it accepts children with the “highest needs and most
   volatile behaviors (that) other hospitals won’t,” Skene said.

   The majority of the cases that DCFS substantiated or continues to
   investigate involve sexual abuse or assault.

   A 12-year-old boy reported in January that he was fondled by a
   17-year-old. Five other patients reported the teen tried to touch them
   inappropriately when employees were not looking, records show. The
   17-year-old was on probation and was sent to juvenile detention
   following the incidents, according to DCFS documents.

   In that case, DCFS cited hospital staff for inadequate supervision and
   wrote that it was unclear “where responsible staff were” when the abuse
   happened and why a 12-year-old was on the same unit with older teens.

   Another investigation into allegations of inadequate supervision
   involved a 16-year-old from Honduras who had come to the U.S.
   unaccompanied. The girl, who is transgender and in the custody of the
   federal government, reported she had sex with another patient at the
   hospital this summer. That investigation is ongoing.

   DCFS also is investigating an allegation by an 8-year-old boy who said
   one of his roommates climbed on top of him and started “to hump” him
   and another stood next to his bed while masturbating, records show.

   One complication in investigating these cases is the lack of video
   evidence. While the hallways contain cameras, the hospital has not
   provided footage to DCFS investigators on several occasions when asked
   for it, ProPublica Illinois found.

   Skene said the agency has discussed the issue with the hospital, and
   the hospital is in the process of replacing its surveillance system.
   The installation of the new system in the children’s building is
   expected to be completed this week, a hospital representative said.

   “It’s just an awful lot of very serious red flags in a very short
   period of time,” Charles Golbert, Cook County acting public guardian,
   said in an interview. He said children would be better served by an
   independent review of the hospital instead of separate investigations
   done by state and federal agencies.

   He added it’s difficult for DCFS to be objective because it depends on
   Lakeshore to care for so many of its children. Without Lakeshore, he
   said, the agency has few options for psychiatric treatment.

   “That’s a conflict of interest,” he said.

   Last month, Michael Jones, a DCFS senior deputy director, said in court
   records that “significant challenges and harm” would follow if
   Lakeshore lost its federal funding and was unable to treat DCFS
   children, reducing the number of available beds for them by 25 percent.
   He called the hospital a “community partner and a necessary ally for
   DCFS and the children we serve.”

   Jones also said the three other hospitals in Chicago that DCFS
   primarily uses do not always accept children in the agency’s care and
   may not be geographically convenient for some patients.

   But Golbert said there’s another reason other hospitals are reluctant
   to take some children from DCFS. Those children, he said, sometimes end
   up staying weeks or months past their release dates because the agency
   can’t find homes for them. Children who remain locked in psychiatric
   hospitals for long periods of time may suffer additional emotional harm
   and sometimes begin mimicking the negative behaviors they are exposed
   to, including sexual and physical misconduct.

   The 12-year-old boy who allegedly sexually assaulted the 7-year-old
   girl at Lakeshore last month had been admitted to the hospital in June
   and was cleared for discharge three weeks later. But he remained at the
   hospital for nearly four more months because DCFS could not find him an
   appropriate placement.

   The alleged assault occurred during that time. The girl he allegedly
   assaulted was cleared for release at the end of August but did not
   leave until September, a week after the reported incident.

   In addition, one of four girls targeted for sexual acts by an
   11-year-old girl in June was cleared for discharge in May. She remained
   unnecessarily hospitalized for more than three months. And records show
   the 12-year-old girl who an employee allegedly sexually abused in
   August had been on a waiting list to go to a residential treatment
   center for two months.

   Lakeshore’s most recent regulatory troubles began this summer at its
   adult building, though documented concerns there go back several years.
   In the last 12 months, at least two people have filed lawsuits in Cook
   County Circuit Court against the hospital alleging sexual assaults at
   the adult building, including a woman who said an employee followed her
   into a bathroom and raped her. Both lawsuits are pending.

   This year alone, state regulators conducted inspections three times at
   the hospital, in July, August and this month. During the July
   inspection, public health inspectors faulted the hospital for having
   doors that posed a suicide risk. They also found that the hospital did
   not collect samples for a rape kit after a patient alleged she was
   sexually assaulted, failed to complete required safety checks and did
   not obtain informed consent from patients before administering
   psychotropic medications, according to a July 27 report obtained
   through an open records request.

   “IDPH is always concerned about the health and safety of patients and
   when deficiencies are found, we follow-up to make sure they are
   corrected,” department spokeswoman Melaney Arnold said in an email. “In
   situations where the health and safety of patients are in immediate
   jeopardy, the hospital is required to eliminate the immediate jeopardy
   and surveyors stay in the hospital until it does.”

   When state inspectors returned the next month, they found the hospital
   had replaced the doors, but they identified additional suicide risks:
   15 phones with long metal cords hanging from walls in hallways and
   dayrooms.

   “This failure potentially put all 54 patients on suicide precautions,
   at risk for serious harm,” public health investigators wrote in the
   August report.

   About three weeks later, federal authorities issued the notice to
   terminate Lakeshore’s Medicare participation, effective Sept. 28.

   One day before the deadline, Lakeshore attorneys filed an emergency
   motion in federal court to halt the move. The attorneys said the
   hospital serves a unique role as one of the largest behavioral health
   providers in Illinois, treating more than 5,000 patients a year and
   routinely accepting children in state custody.

   The attorneys said the hospital would be forced to close and lay off
   hundreds of employees if its Medicare and Medicaid payments were ended.
   Attorneys argued the hospital is doing its best to comply with suicide
   prevention guidelines that are vague and often change. Safer doors had
   been on back order when inspectors arrived in July. The day after the
   inspection, an employee drove to Wyoming to pick up the doors from the
   manufacturer. In addition, they said the phone cords were removed while
   the inspectors were on site.

   The hospital already spent hundreds of thousands of dollars before the
   inspections to remove and replace equipment that posed suicide risks
   throughout the buildings, according to the hospital’s filings.

   Hospital officials also took issue with some of the state regulators’
   other findings, saying many were related to documentation rather than
   actual patient harm. Still, they submitted a total of three correction
   plans — the most recent one just days ago — they said would “ensure
   patients are able to receive care in a safe setting,” according to
   records.

   Federal regulators have twice extended the termination deadline, but a
   threat still looms. While the hospital addressed many of the
   violations, more emerged in an October inspection. Patients as young as
   14 in the children’s building were given powerful psychotropic
   medications without informed consent, records show.

   With Lakeshore still out of compliance, federal authorities have
   notified hospital officials they are setting a new termination date of
   Nov. 30. On that date, the government will stop reimbursing the
   hospital for patients on Medicare. It is unclear if Medicaid payments
   would be affected. More than 80 percent of the hospital’s patients this
   year were insured through Medicare or Medicaid, according to court
   records.

   The American Civil Liberties Union of Illinois, which monitors DCFS as
   part of a federal consent decree, has requested additional information
   from the agency about the conditions at Lakeshore in light of the
   ongoing investigations.

   Claire Stewart, an ACLU attorney, said the group also wants an
   independent review of the hospital. The organization is considering
   legal intervention, she added.

   “We will do what we need to do to protect the youth in care,” Stewart
   said. “This is an immediate safety concern and priority.”

   Filed under:
     * Health Care

   ProPublica is a Pulitzer Prize-winning investigative newsroom. Sign up
   for their newsletter.

Share this:

     * Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
     * Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
     * Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
     * Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)
     * Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)
     *

   Duaa Eldeib, ProPublica @deldeib

   See more

Credibility Indicators

   These are selected by the writer and confirmed by the editor
     * (Submit)
       Original Reporting
       – +
       This article contains new, firsthand information uncovered by its
       reporter(s). This includes directly interviewing sources and
       research / analysis of primary source documents.
     * (Submit)
       On the Ground
       – +
       Indicates that a Newsmaker/Newsmakers was/were physically present
       to report the article from some/all of the location(s) it concerns.
     * (Submit)
       Sources Cited
       – +
       As a news piece, this article cites verifiable, third-party sources
       which have all been thoroughly fact-checked and deemed credible by
       the Newsroom in accordance with the Civil Constitution.
       Learn more about Civil’s Credibility Indicators

   Downtown Primary category in which blog post is published

Families Of Missing Women Linked To R. Kelly Reached Out To Cook County
Prosecutors, Kim Foxx Says

     * Block Club Chicago Staff

   The county's top prosecutor urged anyone with information about R.
   Kelly allegations to contact her office.
   Published on Jan 8, 2019 4:16PM CST
   Pilsen, Little Village, West Loop Primary category in which blog post
   is published

Mondelēz, Maker Of Oreo Cookies, Moving Headquarters To Fulton Market In 2020

     * Mauricio Peña

   The company is bringing 400 corporate employees to a five-story
   building at 905 W. Fulton Market in West Loop next year.
   Published on Jan 8, 2019 11:46AM CST
   Lincoln Park, Old Town Primary category in which blog post is published

Live Nation Venues, Soccer Stadium Scrapped From Lincoln Yards — But $800
Million TIF Plan Remains

     * Kelly Bauer

   Ald. Brian Hopkins wants restaurants and venues that LiveNation will
   have no stake in to replace the current plans for Lincoln Yards.
   Published on Jan 8, 2019 10:11AM CST
   Block Club Chicago

About Us

     * Our Mission
     * Our Team
     * Board of Directors
     * Contact Us

Community

     * Founding Members
     * Supporters
     * Events

Support Us!

     * Newsletter Signup
     * Press
     * Our Supporters

   Subscribe
   Contact Us at newsroom@blockclubchi.org
   Copyright © 2019 Block Club Chicago
     * About
     * Civil Constitution
     * FAQ

     * Have a Problem?

   (Submit) Contact Civil

   Send to Email Address ____________________ Your Name
   ____________________ Your Email Address ____________________
   _________________________ loading Send Email Cancel
   Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
   Email check failed, please try again
   Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.
